<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
			<p>Outside the farmyard wall Sarah again put out a hand to Simon’s arm. “Yon’s Taylor’s spot, isn’t it?” she enquired, as the cottage came up. “Just hold on a minute, and let me see.”</p>
			<p>He obeyed, watching her nervously as she bent and peered at the house, and wondering uneasily what she was about. She knew the house well enough, both inside and out, so she could not be stopping to look at it just for that. She must be trying to form some impression of it that was wholly new, perhaps picturing it as it would be when she had come to live in it herself.</p>
			<p>When he found that she did not speak, he began to offer clipped remarks, anxiously pointing out objects that she was quite unable to see.</p>
			<p>“It’s a good house, missis.⁠ ⁠… You’ll remember it’s a tidy spot. There’s a fairish garden for cabbishes and the like, and a bit of a drying-ground as well. As for berry-bushes, there’s gooseberry and black currant and red⁠ ⁠… and danged if there isn’t a few rasps over at far side wall an’ all!”</p>
			<p>Sarah looked away from the house the moment he started to speak, as if some spell were broken by the sound of his voice. “Ay,” she said, with a total lack of interest, and staring ahead.⁠ ⁠… “Now, master, we’d best get on.”</p>
			<p>Simon, cut off in mid-flight, repeated “Rasps!” in a feeble tone, and again Sarah said “Ay,” and requested him to get on. He drove away rather reluctantly, looking behind him as he went, and muttering of Taylor’s rasps and cabbishes until they were finally lost to sight.</p>
			<p>Now once more they were in the high-flanked lane, with Blindbeck and all that Blindbeck stood for fallen away at last. The cross went with them, indeed, but the calvary dropped behind. The horse turned homeward, and, encouraged by Will’s corn, showed a sudden freakish revival of vanished youth. Bicycles met and passed them in the narrow road, sliding by like thistledown on a wind, while the riders saw only an elderly couple apparently half asleep. Yet even the dullest farm-lad would have cried aloud to them if he had known to what they went. He would have flung himself off his bicycle and barred the road, a humble but valiant imitation of an Angel of God.</p>
			<p>Evening was coming, but the day was still alive, incredibly long as the afternoon had seemed. Simon’s old watch, put right that morning in Witham, asserted that it was only half-past four. The atmosphere had never been really light, and only imperceptibly was it drawing down to dusk. The grey seemed to have deepened and settled a little, but that was all. It was a day on which people forgot the time, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent had said, a day when they had every excuse for forgetting the right time. Simon felt suddenly as though he had never seen the sun either rise or set for at least a week. Yesterday there had been only a swift setting, hurriedly blotted out, and today, if there had been any fugitive brightness of farewell, it must have passed while they were still at the farm. The night was coming unduly to the grey-green land which had never had its meed of sun, just as the night came unfairly to lives whose share of glamour and glory had been missed. He longed to see a light spring out of the west, showing the silver water in a shining line, and re-tinting the heavy, neutral-coloured earth.</p>
			<p>Sun⁠—evening sun lying over the sea⁠—would have made things easier for both of them, but especially for his wife. Even though there was so little that she could see, the warmth and light would at least have lain tenderly upon her lids. Trouble and change were always easier to bear under a smiling sky; it did not mock at the trouble, as smiling faces so often seemed to do. Rain and the dark seemed to narrow a trouble in, so that change was a nameless peril into which each step was into a void. But there was to be no sun for these lost folk who seemed to be straying all the day long; only the unstirred breath of the mist in the blotted west, filling the mighty bowl at whose bottom lay the sea.</p>
			<p>They felt strange with each other, now that they were alone, because of all that the other had done while the two of them were apart. Simon’s sudden decision was as inexplicable to his wife as her afternoon’s jest with Eliza had seemed to him. In his place she would never have stooped to make of herself the younger brother’s man; she would have worked for the hardest driver amongst them sooner than that. Even the close affection between the brothers could not dignify the position in her eyes. She could understand something of Simon’s yearning towards the farm, but Sarah was never the sort of which they make doorkeepers in Heaven. She would never really have understood the strength of the pull, even with no Eliza set like a many-eyed monster on the farmyard wall. He, on the other hand, could not even pretend to understand the Lie, but then the Vision of the Parlour had been granted to her and not to him.</p>
			<p>Both their minds, however, were at work more on the change that was coming than on Sarah’s sudden craze, since always the pressing business of life must supersede the dream. Simon, indeed, did not want to think about Sarah’s behaviour further than he could help, because of that sinister saying about the doings of blind brains. As for Sarah herself, she had done with the dream forever in that moment when she came face to face with the limits of her lie. It had had its tremendous hour in the down-treading of a lifelong foe, but in that one stupendous achievement it had finally passed. Never again would she be able to shut herself in the spell, until the blind saw and the lost spoke, and the sea was crossed in a leap. Never again would she be able to believe that Geordie might come home.</p>
			<p>In spite of their shameful departure, fast fading, however, from his mind, Simon was already planning the bittersweet prospect of their near return. Like so many ideas impossible and even repellent at the start, this had already become natural and full of an acid charm. For the time being he was content to ignore the drawbacks of the position, and to concentrate only upon its obvious gains. His mind, hurrying forward over the next few months, was already disposing of stock, farm-implements and surplus household gear; and in his complete absorption he forgot that he was not alone, and kept jerking out fragments of disjointed speech. Sarah allowed him to amuse himself after this fashion for some time, and then broke dryly into his current of thought.</p>
			<p>“You may as well tell me what’s settled, and get it by with,” she observed in a sardonic tone. “So far, even Eliza seems to know more about it than me. You and Will seem to ha’ fixed things up wi’ a vengeance, that you have! You’d best to tell me how it come about, instead of booing away to yourself like a badly calf.”</p>
			<p>“Nay, it was all fixed that sharp,” Simon grumbled, with an injured air, though very relieved at heart to hear her speak. “There was no time to ax nobody nor nowt. I’m still a bit maiselt about it myself, for the matter o’ that. I don’t know as I’ll be that surprised if I hear tomorrow it’s all off. As for Eliza, it fair beats me how she could ha’ got wind of it so smart! She likely hid herself somewheres when we was talking it out; though she’s not that easy to miss⁠—gert, spying toad!”</p>
			<p>He brisked considerably now that the first awkwardness was past, and went on to tell her, after his usual backwards and forwards fashion, exactly how the new arrangement had come about.</p>
			<p>“It’s not much to crack on, I dare say,” he finished, pleading with her across the disapproving silence which had again risen between them like a wall, “but, when all’s said and done, it’s a sight better than I’d looked for, by a deal. I’d ha’ been bound to hire myself somewheres, to help us make out, and there isn’t a decenter master in t’countryside than Will. It’s a deal better than being odd-job man at some one-horse spot, or maybe scrattin’ up weeds and suchlike at some private house. There’ll be a decent wage, think on, and milk⁠—ay, and happen a load o’ coal an’ all. Will’ll see as we’re rightly done by, never fret! We’ll be right comfortable, I’m sure. Will says his lasses’ll give you a hand wi’ washing and the like, and if happen we get a good sale we might run to a bit o’ help ourselves. You’ll miss t’horse and cart, I reckon, but we’ll find a way out o’ yon as well. If you felt as you fancied a bit of a ride, Will’d like enough loan me a horse and trap.”</p>
			<p>He was coaxing her for all he was worth, but neither the coaxing nor the explanation seemed to get any further than her ears. Again he felt the spasm of irritation which he had felt in the parlour, and was at the same time reminded of its original cause.</p>
			<p>“I don’t say it’ll be over pleasant for either on us,” he went on vexedly, as she did not open her lips, “but you’ll likely admit I did the best I could for us, all the same. It’s a sad pity you and Eliza pull together so bad, but it’s over late to think o’ mending it now. Anyway, you did nowt to mend it by telling yon string o’ lies this afternoon! What, in the name o’ goodness, made you act so strange?”</p>
			<p>She moved then, a touch of the afternoon glamour reaching from Blindbeck, and following her down the lane.</p>
			<p>“Nay, I don’t know.⁠ ⁠… Things come over folk, now and then. I’m right sorry, though, if I set you thinking it was the lad.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve given up thinking owt o’ the sort long since,” he said dejectedly. “I should ha’ thought you would ha’ done the same an’ all.”</p>
			<p>“Things come over folk,” she repeated, unwilling to say more, and he nodded his head, relieved by her softer tone. “You’ll try to make up your mind to Blindbeck, will you, missis?” he pressed on nervously, hoping her mood would last. “It’s a bad best, maybe, but I nobbut did what I could.”</p>
			<p>She gave a sharp sigh, but her voice was firm. “Ay, I’ll make up my mind to it, after a bit.”</p>
			<p>“It’s a big change at our time of life, but you’ll settle, never fear.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, I’ll settle all right. Don’t you fret.”</p>
			<p>“It’s a good shop, Sarah.”</p>
			<p>“Ay.”</p>
			<p>“And Will’s a right good sort.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, ay.”</p>
			<p>The sudden gentleness of her mood prompted him to a further unburdening of his soul. He leaned forward a little in the trap, staring over the grey fields, and with the note of pleading rising and falling in his tone.</p>
			<p>“I don’t mind telling you now, Sarah, but I’ve been fair fretted out o’ my senses all this while. There’s been times I’ve felt like just making off on t’sands, and letting tide settle it for me for good an’ all. Ay, and by Gox! it very near come about, too, one day when I was mooning along and not looking where I was at! But there was you to see to, and I couldn’t rightly bring myself to chuck up the sponge. ’Tisn’t as if the lad was dead, neither⁠—there was that as well. He’s as good as dead, likely, but it’s a different thing, all the same. Folks can get along on a mighty little hope⁠—same as yon old horse as died just when it was learning to live on nowt! We’ve come to a bonny pass, these days, you and Geordie an’ me, but the world isn’t past bearing as long as the three on us is over sod.”</p>
			<p>It was with a sense of enlightenment and escape that they came out finally on to the high road, for in the cleft of the lane every curve of the land stole what little clarity was left to the slowly withdrawing earth. Even Sarah was faintly conscious of lightened lids, as well as of easier breathing as the borders of the road drew further apart. In the lane they had been high, looming presences, over-close to the lurching wheels, but now they ceased to oppress her, though she was still aware that they marched with her as she went. It was as if the furniture of the land was being withdrawn into the wings before the curtain of night was really down; yet even in its slow departure it still formed the picture and dominated the scene. The only real comfort for brain and eyes was on the unfurnished marsh, where even the fenced roads lifted themselves as often as not above their fences to look abroad.</p>
			<p>There was more life, also, on the open road⁠—cycles and traps, and people walking in twos and threes; motorcars, too, at which Simon never so much as glanced aside, though now they were really beginning to look like ghosts in the sinking light. Even when there was nobody on the road there was still the sense of being part of an unseen train, the link which binds traveller to traveller on every principal highway in the land, but especially on those which run north and south. The link strengthens and the thrill deepens as the day lengthens and the hours go on. Each wonders instinctively to what home the other is hastening before he is overtaken by the dark. From each to each at the hour of dusk passes the unconscious Godspeed uniting all who are drawing together towards the adventure of the night.</p>
			<p>And, for Simon and Sarah, as for all, either man or beast, even in this bitter hour, there was the comfort of the road that goes home. There is always a lamp set high in the house to which one returns, even though it be poor and empty and dark. The greatest sorrow awaiting one at the end is not really a sorrow until one steps inside. The ease of the road home is the ineffable ease of the mind. Stout hearts and limbs may carry us out, and barely suffice to stagger us back, but the running and leaping mind can comfort the body on. There is always a lamp set high at the end of the road that is going home.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Not until they had lost it would they realise the perpetual consolation of that long-accustomed road. Times without number they had travelled it, seething with anger and hate, and yet always they were the richer for having passed that way. Simon, busily thinking of Blindbeck and all the advantages of the wealthy farm, did not know that he was putting his real wealth from him with every thought. Yet he would know it all the rest of his life when he drove a road that was not consecrated by the years, when the folk that hailed them in passing were not part of a lifelong chain; when the turns of the road were no longer pictures and books, with each house where it should be and would be for all time; when he stopped at a gate in the dusk and knew it was not his; when he entered a meaningless building at last and knew it was not home.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>But just for the moment he was thinking neither of the immediate present nor of the greater part of his long-reaching past. His mind, unusually stimulated by the day’s events, swung easily to and fro between the future at Blindbeck and the far-off boyhood which he had spent with Will. Blindbeck had never been his home in any sense, but his call to Blindbeck was nevertheless the call of the past. They would renew their youth for each other, the two old men, and forget when they were together that they were old. They turned instinctively to each other, as all turn to those who can recreate for them the young beginnings of their lives. On the marsh Simon always felt immeasurably old, weighted as with an actual burden by the years. He saw himself looking behind him at them as at monsters created in his pride, which now and forever were out of his control. With Will beside him, they would lie in front as they used to do, rolling meadowlands still untouched by the plough of time. Because they had been young together it would be impossible for them to be really old. Because they had been young together they could took smiling, shoulder to shoulder, into the unbelievable grave.</p>
			<p>Not that his longing had any such definite frame of thought as this, though he was aware that in it had lain the motive which had fixed his mind. He only moved towards its fulfilment as all untutored souls move naturally towards release from strain. He scarcely remembered Sarah after their talk had come to an end that was hardly an end, like an unravelled cord of which no one troubles to count the untwisted strands. That mighty leap which he was taking across the years carried him well above both Sarah’s and Geordie’s heads. The school-years, the climbing, running, hungry years were more distinct to him than the heavy, responsible years of marriage and middle life. He saw himself and Will running after the hounds, paddling in calm lakes of gold-shot evening tides, skating by slowly rising moons. He saw a raw lad going shyly but stolidly to his first place, already a man in the awed estimation of the brother left behind. He heard the clink of the first money he had ever earned, which had gone straight from his pocket into the family purse. He had handed it over without a twinge of regret, and his empty hands had continued to thrill with pride. Later, he had begged a couple of shillings for himself and Will, and had never thought of the money then or since but as a gift.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>They came at last to the dangerous, right-angled turn which dropped them down to the marsh, and as the horse began to jerk itself down the hill a car passed slowly above them along the open road. Although the day still lingered, the taillight was already lit, as if the car were setting out on a journey instead of going home. Yet it went slowly and almost reluctantly, like a man who looks over his shoulder all the while. It was as if it was only waiting its opportunity to turn itself in its tracks. But all the time it was drifting gradually away, and the red light, that could hardly as yet impress itself on the dusk, seemed to hesitate for a moment at a curve of the road, and then, as if a hand had been clapped in front of it, was suddenly gone.</p>
			<p>The drop from the highway was like being dropped from a cliff, so distinct was the change to the loneliness of the marsh. The link was broken which made them members of a purposed line, leaving them mere strayed wanderers of whom nobody was aware. The few farmhouses, lifeless-looking in the deadened light, stared always towards great distances over their puny heads. The few trees sprang up before them, suddenly strange, acquiring an almost violent personality against the meaningless scene.</p>
			<p>The straight miles dragged reluctantly past their heavy wheels, and on the unending road they seemed to go forward without purpose and to be set on a journey that had no goal. When at length the stretches of meadow and cropped land gave place to the pale-coloured desert of the sand, there seemed no possible reason why one should cease and the other begin. Away out behind the mist there was a living, moving tide, but here on the marsh there was no consciousness of tide. Things just stopped, that was all, and from the garden became the waste, just as the growth and renewal of life had stopped for the old pair, leaving nothing but desolation before their feet.</p>
			<p>Yet still the earth was with them, and Simon turned his eyes again and again to its vague outlines with relief. Across the bay the cone of the Knott still held to its tangibility and form, protesting against the swamping hand of night. The crown of it, fitted with wood as closely as with a cap, was darker against the sky than the shadowy slopes on which the houses climbed. And, nearer inland still, on the low edge of shore that was like a trail of smoke on the farther side of the sands, a blur of formless yet purposeful grey showed where the tiny hamlet of Sandyeat clustered about the ‘Ship.’</p>
			<p>Sandholes was in sight now, and the horse quickened its pace, triumphing over the last few wearisome yards. As they approached the house, with its white face set on a body of looming buildings behind, they had as always a mingled sensation of sadness and relief. Not that the place was sad to them because of its dreary emptiness set amongst formless fields. In the course of years it had become for them merely an atmosphere, not a thing of sight. They were only depressed by it because for them it was the heart of failure and loss. And in the same way they were relieved by it, dignified, sanctuaried and consoled, because this was their hiding-place against the world, and here the heart of their few memories of joy.</p>
			<p>The house was dark, but they were accustomed to that, used to the door that would not open, however they knocked, and the windows that forever would never frame a face, however they hailed. They were used to that stumbling into the place in the folding dark, to the striking of a match that brought them nothing but the dreary waiting rigidity of the things they had left behind. They were used, too, to an uprising fear on the struck light that some terrible change might have taken place in the empty house; that even the waiting things might have played them false while they were gone.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>So lonely looked the place, that it seemed as if it might even revenge itself upon those who had the temerity to awaken it during that sinking hour, but, as they reached the gate, the old dog asleep in a loose box aroused himself to a hoarse, recognising bark. The few cows, also, waiting to be fed, sent out deep complaints at the sound of the coming wheels. And as they finally rattled into the uneven yard, a woman’s figure stood up and waved to them from the seawall.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
