<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
			<p>Simon had been right in thinking that the tale of the car would be all over the town by the time he arrived. He came across it, indeed, almost the moment that he got in. The driver of the car had told a farmer or two in the inn-yard, and the farmer or two had chuckled with glee and gone out to spread it among the rest. Of course, they took good care that it lost nothing in the telling, and, moreover, the driver had given it a good shove-off at the start. He told them that Simon had shaken his fist and wept aloud, and that Sarah had fainted away and couldn’t be brought round. A later account had it that the chase had lasted fast and furious for miles, ending with an accident in Witham streets. Simon encountered the tale in many lengths and shapes, and it was hard to say whether the flippant or sympathetic folk annoyed him most. He always started out by refusing to discuss the matter at all, and then wouldn’t stop talking about it once he had begun.</p>
			<p>“Ay, well, ye see, I thought it was a hearse,” he always growled, when forced to admit that part of the tale, at least, was true. “Mebbe I was half asleep, or thinking o’ summat else; or likely I’m just daft, like other folk not so far.” Here he usually threw a glance at the enquiring friend, who gave a loud guffaw and shifted from foot to foot. “Ay, a hearse⁠—yon’s what I thought it was, wi’ nid-noddin’ plumes, and happen a corp in a coffin fleein’ along inside. You’ve no call to make such a stir about it as I can see,” he wound up helplessly, with a threatening scowl. “Boggles isn’t out o’ date yet by a parlish long while, and there’s many a body still wick as can mind seeing Jamie Lowther’s headless Coach and Four!”</p>
			<p>He forgot to feel annoyed, however, when he found that his story had made him in some sort the hero of the day. He could see folks talking about him and pointing him out as he went along, and men came up smiling and wanting a chat who as a rule had no more for him than a casual nod. Often, indeed, he had only a dreary time, bemoaning his fate with one or two cronies almost as luckless as himself; listening, perhaps, on the edge of an interested group, or wandering into some bar for a sup of ale and a pipe. But to-day he was as busy as an old wife putting the story to rights, and when he had stopped being angry for having behaved like a fool, he began to feel rather proud of himself for having done something rather fine. He ended, indeed, by laughing as heartily as the rest, and allowed several points to pass which had nothing whatever to do with the truth. He felt more important than he had done for years, and forgot for a while the press of his troubles and the fear about Sarah’s eyes. Will told himself that he hadn’t seen him so cheerful for long, and wondered whether things were really as bad at the farm as his brother had made out.</p>
			<p>They made a curious couple as they went about, because in face and figure they were so alike, and yet the stamp of their different circumstances was so plain. They had the same thin face and dreamy eyes, lean figure and fine bones, but whereas one carried his age well and his head high, the other had long since bowed himself to the weight of the years. Will wore a light overcoat of a modern make, brown boots and a fashionable soft hat; but Simon’s ancient suit was of some rough, hard stuff that had never paid any attention to his frame. Will had a white collar and neat tie; but Simon had a faded neckcloth with colourless spots, and he wore dubbined boots that had clogged soles, and a wideawake that had once been black but now was green. Eliza often observed in her kindly way that Simon looked old enough to be Will’s father, but indeed it was in the periods to which they seemed to belong that the difference was most marked. Will had been pushed ahead by prosperity and a striving brood; while Simon had gone steadily down the hill where the years redouble the moment you start to run.</p>
			<p>They had encountered the agent early on, and fixed an appointment for twelve o’clock; and afterwards they spent the morning together until noon struck from the Town Hall. Will had grown rather tired of hearing the hearse story by then, and felt slightly relieved when the time came for them to part. “Nay, I’ll not come in,” he demurred, as Simon urged him at the door of the ‘Rising Sun.’ “You’ll manage a deal better by yourself. You needn’t fear, though, but what I’ll see you through. We’ll settle summat or other at Blindbeck this afternoon.”</p>
			<p>But at the very moment he turned away he changed his mind again and turned back. “I can’t rightly make out about yon car,” he asked, almost as if against his will. “What, in the name o’ fortune, made you behave like yon?”</p>
			<p>Simon muttered gloomily that he didn’t know, and shuffled his feet uncomfortably on the step. Now that the shadow of the coming interview was upon him, he was not so perfectly sure as he had been that the story was a joke. He remembered his terror when the car was at his back, his frantic certainty that there were strange things in the air. He took it amiss, too, both as a personal insult and from superstition, that the Town Hall chimes should be playing “There is no luck about the house” just as he stepped inside.</p>
			<p>“It was nobbut a hired car, wasn’t it,” Will went on⁠—“wi’ two chaps in it, they said, as come from Liverpool way?”</p>
			<p>“That’s what they’ve tellt me since,” Simon agreed, “though I never see it plain.⁠ ⁠… Seems as if it might be a warning or summat,” he added, with a shamefaced air.</p>
			<p>“Warning o’ what?” Will threw at him with a startled glance. “Nay, now! Whatever for?”</p>
			<p>“Death, happen,” Simon said feebly⁠—“nay, it’s never that! I’m wrong in my head, I doubt,” he added, trying to laugh; “but there’s queerish things, all the same. There’s some see coffins at the foot o’ their beds, and you’ll think on when last Squire’s missis died sudden-like yon hard winter, she had it she could smell t’wreaths in t’house every day for a month before.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, well, you’d best put it out of your head as sharp as you can,” Will soothed him, moving away. “You’re bothering overmuch about the farm, that’s what it is. A nip o’ frost in the air’ll likely set you right. Weather’s enough to make anybody dowly, it’s that soft.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, it’s soft,” Simon agreed, lifting his eyes to look at the sky, and wondering suddenly how long it had taken the gull to get itself out to sea. His brother nodded and went away, and he drifted unwillingly into the inn. The chimes had finished their ill-omened song, but the echo of it still seemed to linger on the air. They told him inside that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent was engaged, so he went into the bar to wait, seating himself where he could see the stairs. The landlord tried to coax him to talk, but he was too melancholy to respond, and could only sit waiting for the door to open and summon him overhead. He was able to think, now that he was away from the crowd and the chaff about the hearse, but no amount of thinking could find him a way out. He had already given the agent a hint of his business, and would only have to confirm it when he got upstairs, but it seemed to him at the moment as if the final words would never be said. After a while, indeed, he began to think that he would sneak away quietly and let the appointment go. He would say no more about the notice to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent, and things might take their way for another year. It was just possible, with the promised help from Will, that they might manage to scrape along for another year.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He left it there at last and got to his feet, but even as he did so he remembered Sarah’s eyes. He wondered what the doctor had said and wished he knew, because, of course, there would be no question of staying if the report were bad. He was still standing, hesitating, and wondering what he should do, when the door of the Stewards’ Room opened above, and a man came out.</p>
			<p>It was, as somehow might have been expected, the stranger of the car, otherwise Simon’s now celebrated ‘hearse.’ Simon, however, had not looked at him then, and he barely glanced at him now. It was a blind day, as Sarah had said, and all through the Thornthwaites seemed determined to be as blind as the day. The agent followed him out, looking cheerful and amused. “I wish you luck all round!” Simon heard him say, as he shook the stranger’s hand, and thought morosely that it was easy and cheap to wish folks luck. “This should be the finest day of your life,” he added more gravely, looking over the rail, and the man going down looked up and said “That’s so!” in a fervent tone. The old farmer waiting in the bar felt a spasm of envy and bitterness at the quietly triumphant words. “The finest day of your life,”⁠—that was for the man going down. “The heaviest day of your life,”⁠—that was for the man going up. With a touch of dreary humour he thought to himself that it was really he who was going down, if it came to that.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>With a feeling of something like shame he kept himself out of sight until the stranger had disappeared, and then experienced a slight shock when Dent called to him in the same cheery tone. Almost without knowing it he had looked for the voice to change, and its geniality jarred on his dismal mood. Somehow it seemed to put him about at the start, and when Dent laid a hand on his shoulder, saying⁠—“Well, Simon!” with a smile, it was all he could do not to give him a surly snarl by way of reply. They went into the old-fashioned room, which smelt of horsehair and wool mats, and Simon seated himself miserably on the extreme edge of a chair. Dent went to the window and lifted a finger to somebody in the street, and then seated himself at the table, and said “Well, Simon!” and smiled again. He was a strongly built man, with a pleasant face, which seemed rather more pleasant than need be to his visitor’s jaundiced eye.</p>
			<p>He looked away from it, however, staring at the floor, and after the first conventional remarks began his tale of woe, that slow trickle of disaster which always gathered itself into terrible spate. “You’ll know what I’m here for, sir,” he concluded, at the end of his first breath, twisting his hat like a tea-tray in his restless hands. “Things has got that bad wi’ us I doubt we can’t go on, and so we’ve made up our minds we’d best clear out next year.”</p>
			<p>Dent nodded kindly in answer, but with a rather abstracted air. He had listened patiently enough to the slow tale, but Simon had a feeling that his tragic recital was not receiving the sympathy it deserved. He began a fresh relation of the ills which had befallen him at the farm, intending a grand climax to be capped by Sarah’s eyes; but there were so many dead troubles to dig out of their graves as he went along, that the last and most vital dropped from the reckoning, after all.</p>
			<p>“Ay, well, you’ve likely heard all this before,” he finished lamely in the middle of a speech, conscious that he had missed his point, though without being able to say how. “We’ve had a bad year this year an’ all, and I can’t see as it’s any use holding on. Me and my missis fixed it up as we come in, so if you’ll take my notice, sir, we’ll go next spring.”</p>
			<p>“Your wife’s in town, is she?” Dent asked. For some reason he looked again at the window from which he had waved. “How does she take the thought of leaving the farm?”</p>
			<p>“Well, sir, we’ll both feel it, after all these years, but I don’t know as it’s any use calling out. I put it to her as we’d better quit, and she agreed to it right off.”</p>
			<p>“I wish you’d brought her along,” the agent said, still speaking in a detached tone. There were some notes on the table within reach of his hand, and he glanced thoughtfully at them as he spoke.</p>
			<p>Simon stiffened a little, and looked surprised. “I’m speaking for both on us, sir, as I said before.”</p>
			<p>“Of course, Simon,” Dent said, rousing himself. “I know that. But I’d have liked a word with her, all the same.” His glance went back to the notes, and he smiled as if at his own thoughts.⁠ ⁠… “And so you’ve really made up your minds that you’d better go?”</p>
			<p>“Haven’t I been saying so, sir, all along?” Simon was really injured now, and his wounded dignity showed in his tone. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent was taking the whole thing far too easily, he thought. First of all, he did not seem to be listening as much as he might, and then, when the notice was offered, he actually smiled! Tenants of forty years’ standing do not look to have their departure speeded with smiles. Simon thought it heartless, to say the least, and only to be excused because <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent did not know what they had to face. They had not been very satisfactory tenants, of course⁠—even Simon admitted that⁠—and it was more than likely that the agent was rather relieved. At least he was saved the unpleasant task of turning them out, a duty which, as Simon knew, had seemed imminent more than once. But they were respectable folk of good stock, and they were not entirely to blame because they were failures, too. Gravity was their due, anyhow, if not sympathy, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent, on this solemn occasion, seemed to be failing them in both.</p>
			<p>“Of course you know you’re late with your notice?” he observed presently, looking up. “You ought to have made up your minds a couple of months ago.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, we’re late, I know, but we weren’t thinking of owt o’ the sort then. I’m sorry if we’ve put you about, but you’ll not have that much trouble in getting rid of the farm. It’s nobbut a small spot, you’ll think on. It’ll let right off the reel.”</p>
			<p>“It’s been going back a long while, though,” Dent said thoughtfully, and then felt penitent as the old man flushed. Just for the moment he had forgotten that Simon was in the room.</p>
			<p>“Of course I know you’ve had pretty rough luck,” he went on hastily, trying to cover it up. “Sandholes holds the record for every sort of mischance. It sounds like one of the old fairy-tales,” he added, laughing⁠—“curses and all that!⁠ ⁠… But I can’t help thinking it would have been better for everybody if there had been a change earlier on.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, well, you’ve gitten your change now, and no mistake about it!” Simon retorted angrily, deeply hurt. There was something wrong with the scene, though he could not tell what it was. He only knew that he had not expected it to go in the very least like this.</p>
			<p>“It should have been made long since if it was to do you any good.⁠ ⁠…” Dent did not seem to notice that there was anything amiss. He sat, tapping the table, deep in thought, while Simon seethed.⁠ ⁠… “Sure you couldn’t put on for another year?”</p>
			<p>This change of front upset his visitor so completely that he dropped his hat. He sat glaring at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent with a dropped mouth.</p>
			<p>“Nay, then, I just couldn’t!” he snapped at last, wondering whether he was on his head or his heels. “Losh save us!” he added angrily, “haven’t I tellt you I meant to gang ever since I come in? It’ll take me all my time to hang on till spring, as it is.”</p>
			<p>“You’ve run it as close as that?” Dent enquired, and Simon gave a grunt.</p>
			<p>“Ay, and I’m not the first as has done it, neither!”</p>
			<p>“Couldn’t your Blindbeck brother see to give you a hand? He’s done well for himself, I should say, and his children are getting on.”</p>
			<p>“He’s given us a hand more than once already, has Will, but there’s no sense in throwing good money after bad. We’ll have to quit next year, if we don’t this. Farm’s going back, as you say, and I’m over old to pull it round. I can’t keep going for ever, nay, nor my missis, neither.”</p>
			<p>He remembered Sarah’s eyes as he spoke, and how they were enough to clinch the matter in themselves, but he was too offended even to mention them by now. There was no telling to-day how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent would take the tragic news. He had smiled and looked cheerful over the notice to quit, but Simon felt he would not be able to bear it if he smiled at Sarah’s eyes. Indeed, it was all he could do to keep a hold on himself, as it was⁠—first of all hearing that he ought to have gone long since, and then being told to stop when he’d settled to clear out!</p>
			<p>The trend of his injured thought must have reached the other at last, for he roused himself to look at his sulky face.</p>
			<p>“You needn’t think I’m trying to shove the place down your throat!” he said, with a laugh. “But I certainly thought you’d rather be stopping on!”</p>
			<p>Simon felt a little appeased, though he took care not to show any sign. He growled miserably that they had never intended to quit except under a coffin-lid.</p>
			<p>“This is where you want a lad of your own to take hold⁠—a lad with a good wife who would be able to see to you both. You’ve no news, I suppose, of that son of yours that went overseas?”</p>
			<p>“A word or two, now and then⁠—nowt more. Nowt as’d set you running across t’countryside to hear.”</p>
			<p>“No chance of getting him home again, is there?” Dent enquired, and Simon stared at the floor and shook his head. He must have felt a change in the atmosphere, however, for suddenly he began to repeat what Sarah had told May, how Geordie had written for money, and there had been none to send. The words came easily after he had made a start, and for the time being he forgot his resentment and injured-tenant’s pride.</p>
			<p>“I reckon you know, sir, how it all come about. There’ll ha’ been plenty o’ folk ready to tell you, I’ll be bound, and them as knowed least’ll likely ha’ tellt you most. We never had but the one lad, Sarah and me, and, by Gox! but he was a limb! The queer thing was that my brother Will’s eldest should ha’ been the very marrow o’ mine⁠—looks, voice, ways, ay, and character an’ all. Will and me were whyet enough lads, I’m sure; it was terble strange we should breed a pair o’ rattlehorns like yon. You couldn’t rightly say there was any harm to ’em, but they were that wick they mun always be making a stir. Being that like, too, helped ’em rarely when there was chanst o’ their getting catched. Each on ’em had a call for telling when he was about. Jim’s was a heron like, but Geordie’s was nobbut a gull⁠—”</p>
			<p>This time it was his own glance that went to the window, as again he remembered the bird gone out to the waves. When Dent spoke, his mind came back from its flight with a tiny jerk.</p>
			<p>“Then they made off to Canada, didn’t they, the two lads? You told me something about it when I first came.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, they cleared off in a night without a word or owt, and they’ve never done no good from then to this. Sarah sticks to it Geordie would never ha’ gone at all if it hadn’t been for Jim, and Will’s missis sticks to it t’other way about. I reckon there was nowt to choose between ’em myself, but my missis never could abide poor Jim. He was that set on her, though, there was no keeping him off the spot. Right cruel she was to him sometimes, but she couldn’t drive him off. He’d just make off laughing and whistling, and turn up again next day. Of course, she was bound to have her knife into him, for his mother’s sake. She and Eliza have always been fit to scratch at each other all their lives.”</p>
			<p>“Long enough to finish any feud, surely, and a bit over? It’s a pity they can’t bury the hatchet and make friends.”</p>
			<p>“They’ll happen make friends when the rabbit makes friends wi’ the ferret,” Simon said grimly, “and the blackbird wi’ the cat! I don’t say Sarah isn’t to blame in some ways, but she’s had a deal to put up wi’, all the same. There’s summat about Eliza as sets you fair bilin’ inside your bones! It’s like as if she’d made up her mind to pipe Sarah’s eye straight from the very start. She never said ay to Will, for one thing, till Sarah and me had our wedding-day fixed, and then danged if she didn’t make up her mind to get wed that day an’ all! She fixed same church, same parson, same day and same time⁠—ay, an’ there’s some folk say she’d ha’ fixed on t’same man if she’d gitten chanst!” He paused for a moment to chuckle when he had said that, but he was too bitter to let his vanity dwell on it for long. “She tellt parson it was a double wedding or summat o’ the sort, but she never let wit on’t to Sarah and me until she was fair inside door. Sarah and me walked to kirk arm in arm, wi’ nowt very much by-ordinar’ on our backs; but Eliza come scampering up in a carriage and pair, donned up in a white gown and wi’ a gert, waggling veil. Will was that shammed on it all he couldn’t abide to look me in t’face, but there, I reckon he couldn’t help hisself, poor lad! Sarah was that wild I could feel her fair dodderin’ wi’ rage as we stood alongside at chancel-step. She was that mad she could hardly shape to get her tongue round Weddin’-Service or owt, and when we was in t’vestry I see her clump both her feet on the tail of Eliza’s gown. She would have it nobody knew she was as much as getting wed at all⁠—they were that busy gawping at Eliza and her veil. She was a fine, strapping lass, Eliza was, and I’d a deal o’ work keeping my eyes off’n her myself!⁠ ⁠… ay, and I won’t say but what she give me a sheep’s eye or so at the back o’ Will as well.⁠ ⁠…” He chuckled again, and his face became suddenly youthful, with a roguish eye. “But yon was no way o’ starting in friendly, was it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent?</p>
			<p>“Ay, well, things has gone on like that atween ’em more or less ever since, and I won’t say but Sarah’s gitten a bit of her own back when she’s gitten chanst. Will having all the luck and such-like hasn’t made things better, neither. Blindbeck’s ganged up and Sandholes has ganged down⁠—ay, and seems like to hit bottom afore it stops! Will and me have hung together all along, but the women have always been at each other’s throats. It riled Eliza Jim being always at our spot, and thinking a deal more o’ Sarah than he did of her. Neither on ’em could break him of it, whatever they said or did. He always stuck to it Sandholes was his home by rights.”</p>
			<p>“Pity the two of them aren’t here to help you now,” Dent said. “Those runabout lads often make fine men.”</p>
			<p>“Nay, I doubt they’ve not made much out, anyway round.” Simon shook his head. “Likely they’re best where they be,” he said, as Sarah had said on the road in. He sat silent a moment longer for politeness’ sake, and then was stopped again as he rose to go.</p>
			<p>“May I enquire what you intend to do when you leave the farm?”</p>
			<p>The old man’s face had brightened as he talked, but now the shadow came over it again.</p>
			<p>“I can’t rightly tell, sir, till I’ve had a word wi’ Will, but anyway he’ll not let us come to want. He’s offered us a home at Blindbeck afore now, but I reckon his missis’d have summat to say to that. Ay, and mine an’ all!” he added, with a fresh attempt at a laugh. “There’d be lile or nowt done on t’farm, I reckon, if it ever come about. It’d take the lot on us all our time to keep them two apart!”</p>
			<p>Again, as he finished, he remembered Sarah’s eyes, and once again he let the opportunity pass. He was on his feet now, anxious to get away, and there seemed little use in prolonging this evil hour. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent would think they were for ever whingeing and whining and like enough calling out before they were hurt.⁠ ⁠… He moved hurriedly to the door, conscious of a sense of relief as well as of loss, and Sarah’s eyes missed their final chance of getting into the talk.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“You’re likely throng, sir,” he finished, “and I’ll not keep you.” He put a hand to the latch. “Anyway, you’ll kindly take it as we’ll quit next year.”</p>
			<p>Dent said⁠—“No, Simon, I shan’t do anything of the sort!” and laughed when the other shot round on him again with open mouth. His expression was grave, however, as he ended his speech. “I want you to think it over a bit first.”</p>
			<p>Simon felt his head going round for the second time. The red came into his thin face.</p>
			<p>“I don’t rightly know what you’re driving at, sir,” he said, with a dignified air. “I reckon I can give in my notice same as anybody else?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Lord, yes, Simon! Of course.” Dent’s eyes went back to the notes. “Yes, of course you can.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, well, then?” Simon demanded stiffly. “What’s all this stir?”</p>
			<p>“Well,⁠ ⁠… it’s like this, you see⁠ ⁠… you’ve missed your time. It was due a couple of months back, as I said before.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, but you’re not that hard and fast about notice, as a rule! Tom Robison did t’same thing last year, you’ll think on, and you let it pass. Seems to me you’re by way of having a joke wi’ me, sir,” he added, in a pitiful tone, “and I don’t know as it’s kind, seeing how I’m placed.”</p>
			<p>Dent jumped to his feet and came across to lay a hand on his arm.</p>
			<p>“It’s only that I’ve a feeling you’ll change your mind, Simon,” he said earnestly, “and you’ll be sorry if you’ve spread it about that you’re going to quit. A week, say⁠—a week won’t make that much difference, will it? Can’t you let it stand over another week?”</p>
			<p>“You said a minute back ’twas a pity we’d stopped so long! I can’t make out what you’re at, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dent⁠—I’m danged if I can!”</p>
			<p>The agent laughed and left him to stroll back again to the window, where he stood looking down into the full street.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps we’re neither of us as clear in our minds as we might be!” he observed, with a cryptic smile. “The weather, perhaps; it’s only a dreary day. I’m not one of the folks who like November grey.”</p>
			<p>“Tides is big an’ all,” Simon found himself saying, unable to resist the lure. “We’ve had t’watter up agen t’wall every night this week. Last night I went out for a look afore it was dark, but it was that thick it was all I could do to tell it was there at all. There was just summat grey-like lifting under my nose; but, by Gox! it was deep enough for all it was so whyet!”</p>
			<p>Dent shivered at the drear little picture which the other had conjured up.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know how you sleep,” he said, “perched on the edge of things like that! It would give me fits to have the sea knocking twice a day at my back door.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, it knocks,” Simon said slowly, with a thoughtful air. “There’s whiles you’d fair think it was axing for somebody to come out.⁠ ⁠… You’ll mind yon time you were near catched by the tide?” he went on, after a pause. “Eh, man, but I was in a terble tew yon night!”</p>
			<p>“It was my own fault,” Dent laughed⁠—“not that it was any the nicer for that! I knew the time of the tide, but I’d forgotten the time of day. It was a day something like this, much the same dismal colour all through. Lord, no!” He shivered again. “I’ve not forgotten, not I! I’ll never forget pounding away from that horrible wave, and finding myself, quite without knowing it, back below the farm!”</p>
			<p>“It was my missis saved you that night,” Simon said, “and a near shave it was an’ all! Tide would ha’ got you even then if it hadn’t been for her. We heard you hollerin’ and came out to look, but we couldn’t see nowt, it was that dark. I thought we’d fancied it like, as we didn’t hear no more, but Sarah wouldn’t hear of owt o’ the sort. She would have it she could see you liggin’ at bottom o’ t’bank, and she give me no peace till I’d crammelled down to look.”</p>
			<p>“Well, you may be sure I’m grateful enough,” the agent said, as they shook hands. “I wouldn’t wish my worst enemy a death like that. I hope it’s been put to the credit side of her account.”</p>
			<p>He followed this caller out as he had done the last, and again, leaning over the railing, he called “Good luck!” Simon, looking up, full of resentment, saw the face above him bright with smiles. He went out with offended dignity written in every line.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
